



Fellow - Wikipedia



























Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file





Languages

Language links are at the top of the page.



















Search











Search





























Create account

Log in








Personal tools





 Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Education and academia



Toggle Education and academia subsection





1.1Teaching fellowships







1.2Medical fellowships







1.3Research fellowships





1.3.1As an academic position







1.3.2As a financial grant









1.4Fellowships as a training program







1.5Fellowships as a special membership grade







1.6In ancient universities







1.7In the U.S.









2Industry and corporate fellows



Toggle Industry and corporate fellows subsection





2.1Nonprofit and government fellowships









3See also







4References

















Toggle the table of contents







Fellow



21 languages




العربيةবাংলাCatalàDanskDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisગુજરાતી한국어हिन्दीBahasa IndonesiaItaliano日本語Norsk bokmålPortuguêsРусскийSimple EnglishSvenskaУкраїнська中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR codeWikidata item





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia Commons

























From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Learned academic peer
"Fellowship" redirects here. For other uses, see Fellowship (disambiguation) and Fellow (disambiguation).
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Fellow" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (June 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
A fellow is a concept whose exact meaning depends on context.
In learned or professional societies, it refers to a privileged member who is specially elected in recognition of their work and achievements.[1][2] 
Within the context of higher educational institutions, a fellow can be a member of a highly ranked group of teachers at a particular college or university or a member of the governing body in some universities; 
it can also be a specially selected postgraduate student who has been appointed to a post (called a fellowship) granting a stipend, research facilities and other privileges for a fixed period (usually one year or more) in order to undertake some advanced study or research, often in return for teaching services.[1][2] 
In the context of research and development-intensive large companies or corporations, the title "fellow" is sometimes given to a small number of senior scientists and engineers. 
In the context of medical education in North America, a fellow is a physician who is undergoing a supervised, sub-specialty medical training (fellowship) after having completed a specialty training program (residency).


Education and academia[edit]
In education and academia there are several kinds of fellowships, awarded for different reasons.

Teaching fellowships[edit]
Main article: Teaching fellow
The title of (senior) teaching fellow is used to denote an academic teaching position at a university or similar institution and is roughly equivalent to the title of (senior) lecturer. The title (senior) fellow can also be bestowed to an academic member of staff upon retirement who continues to be affiliated to a university in the United Kingdom.
The term teaching fellow or teaching assistant is used, in the United States and United Kingdom, in secondary school, high school and middle school setting for students or adults that assist a teacher with one or more classes.[3]

Medical fellowships[edit]
Main article: Fellowship (medicine)
In US medical institutions, a fellow refers to someone who has completed residency training (e.g. in internal medicine, pediatrics, general surgery, etc.) and is currently in a 1 to 3 year subspecialty training program (e.g. cardiology, pediatric nephrology, transplant surgery, etc.).

Research fellowships[edit]
As an academic position[edit]
Main article: Research fellow
The title of research fellow may be used to denote an academic position at a university or a similar institution; it is roughly equivalent to the title of lecturer in the Commonwealth teaching career pathway.[citation needed]

As a financial grant[edit]
Research fellow may also refer to the recipient of academic financial grant or scholarship.
For example, in Germany, institutions such as the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation offer research fellowship for postdoctoral research and refer to the holder as research fellows, while the award holder may formally hold a specific academic title at their home institution (e.g., Privatdozent).[4]
These are often shortened to the name of the programme or organization, e.g. Dorothy Hodgkin Fellow rather than Dorothy Hodgkin Research Fellow, except where this might cause confusion with another fellowship, (e.g. Royal Society University Research Fellowship.[5][6][7][8])
In the context of graduate school in the United States and Canada, a fellow is a recipient of a postgraduate fellowship. Examples include the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship, the DoD National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship, the DOE Computational Science Graduate Fellowship, the Guggenheim Fellowship, the Rosenthal Fellowship, the Frank Knox Memorial Fellowship, the Woodrow Wilson Teaching Fellowship and the Presidential Management Fellowship. It is granted to prospective or current students, on the basis of their academic or research achievements.
In the UK, research fellowships are awarded to support postdoctoral researchers such as those funded by the Wellcome Trust[9] and the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC).[10] At ETH Zurich, postdoctoral fellowships support incoming researchers.[11] The MacArthur Fellows Program (aka "genius grant") as prestigious research fellowship awarded in the United States.

Fellowships as a training program[edit]
Fellowships may involve a short placement for capacity building,[12][13] e.g., to get more experience in government, such as the American Association for the Advancement of Science's fellowships[14] and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Fellowship programs. Some institutions offer fellowships as a professional training program as well as a financial grant, such as the Balsillie School of International Affairs, where tuition and other fees are paid by the fellowship.

Fellowships as a special membership grade[edit]
Main article: Learned society fellow
Fellows are often the highest grade of membership of many professional associations or learned societies, for example, the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators, the Chartered Governance Institute or Royal College of Surgeons. Lower grades are referred to as members (who typically share voting rights with the fellows), or associates (who may or may not, depending on whether "associate" status is a form of full membership). 
Additional grades of membership exist in, for example, the IEEE and the ACM.
Fellowships of this type can be awarded as a title of honor in their own right, e.g. the Fellowship of the Royal Society (FRS).
Exclusive learned societies such as the Royal Society have Fellow as the only grade of membership.
Appointment as an honorary fellow in a learned or professional society can be either to honour exceptional achievement or service within the professional domain of the awarding body or to honour contributions related to the domain from someone who is professionally outside it. Membership of the awarding body may or may not be a requirement.
How a fellowship is awarded varies for each society, but may typically involve some or all of these:

A qualifying period in a lower grade
Passing a series of examinations
Nomination by two existing fellows who know the applicant professionally
Evidence of continued formal training post-qualification
Evidence of substantial achievement in the subject area
Submission of a thesis or portfolio of works which will be examined
Election by a vote of the fellowship
In ancient universities[edit]

At the ancient universities of the University of Oxford, the University of Cambridge, and Trinity College, Dublin, members of the teaching staff typically have two affiliations: one as a reader, lecturer, or other academic rank within a department of the university, as at other universities, and a second affiliation as a fellow of one of the colleges of the university.
The fellows, sometimes referred to as university dons, form the governing body of the college.  They may elect a council to handle day-to-day management. All fellows are entitled to certain privileges within their colleges, which may include dining at High Table (free of charge) and possibly the right to a room in college (free of charge).[citation needed]
At Cambridge, retired academics may remain fellows.[citation needed] At Oxford, however, a Governing Body fellow would normally be elected a fellow emeritus and would leave the Governing Body upon his or her retirement.[citation needed] Distinguished old members of the college, or its benefactors and friends, might also be elected 'Honorary Fellow', normally for life; but beyond limited dining rights this is merely an honour. Most Oxford colleges have 'Fellows by Special Election' or 'Supernumerary Fellows', who may be members of the teaching staff, but not necessarily members of the Governing Body.
Some senior administrators of a college such as bursars are made fellows, and thereby become members of the governing body, because of their importance to the running of a college.[citation needed]

In the U.S.[edit]
At some universities in the United States, "fellows" are members of the Board of Trustees who hold administrative positions as non-executive trustee rather than academics.[citation needed]

Industry and corporate fellows[edit]
See also: Category:Corporate fellows, IBM Fellow, and ICL Fellows
In industries intensive in science, engineering medicine, and research & development,  companies may appoint a very small number of top senior researchers as corporate, technical or industry fellows, either in Science or in Engineering. These are internationally recognized leaders who are among the best in the world in their respective fields.[15][16][17]
Corporate, Technical or Industry Fellow in either Science or Engineering is the most senior rank or title one can achieve in a scientific or engineering career, though fellows often also hold business titles such as Vice President[18][19] or Chief Technology Officer.[20][21]
Notable examples of fellows in scientific, medical and other research-intensive organizations include:

Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) Fellows[22]
Apple Fellows[23]
Battelle Fellows[24][25]
Bell Labs Fellows[26]
Boeing Fellows
DXC Technology Fellows[27]
DuPont Fellows[28]
Google fellows[citation needed]
Henry Ford Technical Fellows
HP Fellows[29]
Intel Fellows[30]
Microsoft Fellows
NASA Fellows[31]
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) Fellows[32]
RTI International fellows[33]
Toray Fellows[34]
Nonprofit and government fellowships[edit]
The title fellow can be used for participants in a professional development program run by a nonprofit or governmental organization.  This type of fellowship is a short term work opportunity (1–2 years)[35] for professionals who already possess some level of academic or professional expertise that will serve the nonprofit mission.  Fellows are given a stipend as well as professional experience and leadership training.

See also[edit]



Look up fellow in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Honorary title (academic)
List of science awards
References[edit]


^ a b "Definition of fellow". Lexico.com. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on August 14, 2020. Retrieved 16 March 2021.

^ a b "Definition of 'fellow'". HarperCollins Publishers. Retrieved 16 March 2021.

^ "North Carolina Teaching Fellows Program". teachingfellows.org. Teaching Fellows. Retrieved 2013-12-04.

^ Ten Years' Growth - What Fruit Has the Georg Forster Programme Borne?, Retrieved on 18 Feb 2009

^ "Research Fellows Directory". London: Royal Society. Archived from the original on 3 May 2016. Retrieved 19 June 2016.

^ "Research Fellows". Imperial College London. Archived from the original on 12 June 2016. Retrieved 19 June 2016. Contains examples (as of 19 June 2016) of staff titled "Research Fellow", "Junior Research Fellow", "Royal Society – EPSRC Dorothy Hodgkin Research Fellow" and "Royal College of Surgeons Research Fellow".

^ "University Research Fellowship: for outstanding scientists in the UK". Royal Society. Archived from the original on 2016-02-03.

^ Cook, Alan (2000). "URFs become FRS: Frances Ashcroft, Athene Donald and John Pethica". Notes and Records of the Royal Society. 54 (3): 409–411. doi:10.1098/rsnr.2000.0181. S2CID 58095147.

^ Anon (2016). "Sir Henry Wellcome Postdoctoral Fellowships". wellcome.ac.uk. London: Wellcome Trust.

^ Anon (2016). "David Phillips Fellowships". bbsrc.ac.uk. Swindon: Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council.

^ Anon (2016). "ETH Zurich Postdoctoral Fellowships (ETH Fellows)". ethz.ch.

^ "Graduate Fellowships and Traineeship Programs", in: Assessment of NIH Minority Research and Training Programs: Phase 3. [1]

^ Culp, Ron (19 February 2013). "Differentiating Between Internships and Fellowships".

^ "Fellowships". American Association for the Advancement of Science.

^ "Corporate Fellows | ORNL". www.ornl.gov. Retrieved 2019-06-17.

^ LaRC, Denise Adams. "NASA - Langley Employees Among First NASA Technical Fellows". www.nasa.gov. Retrieved 2019-06-17.

^ "Nokia Bell Labs: Awards & Recognition". www.bell-labs.com. Retrieved 2019-06-17.

^ "All of Chris Swan's Content on InfoQ". www.infoq.com. Retrieved 2019-06-17.

^ "Science at PNNL - Johannes Lercher". www.pnnl.gov. Retrieved 2019-06-17.

^ "Sue Clark | PNNL". www.pnnl.gov. Retrieved 2019-06-17.

^ Foley, Mary Jo. "Microsoft Big Brains: Dave Campbell". ZDNet. Retrieved 2019-06-17.

^ "AMD Promotes Two Technical Leaders to Corporate Fellow". Archived from the original on 2018-06-12. Retrieved 2018-06-12.

^ "Phil Schiller Advances to Apple Fellow". www.apple.com.

^ "Senior Research Fellows | PNNL". www.pnnl.gov.

^ "Dr. Amy Heintz Named First Battelle Technical Fellow". Battelle.

^ "Nokia Bell Labs: 2017 Bell Labs Fellows Announced". www.bell-labs.com. 7 December 2017.

^ "DXC Fellows, Distinguished Architects, Distinguished Engineers and Distinguished Technologists". DXC Technology.

^ "Awards & Recognition | DuPont". www.dupont.com.

^ "HP Fellows & Sr Fellows". HP Corporate Information.

^ "Intel Senior Fellows: An Exclusive Club". Intel Newsroom.

^ LaRC, Denise Adams. "NASA - Langley Employees Among First NASA Technical Fellows". www.nasa.gov.

^ "Corporate Fellows | ORNL". www.ornl.gov.

^ "RTI Fellow Program". RTI. February 19, 2016.

^ "TORAY". www.toray.com. Retrieved 2020-07-21.

^ UVM Career Services. "Find Non-Profit Fellowships". University of Vermont. Retrieved 19 July 2011.


vtePhaleristicsAuxiliary science of history and numismatics about orders, decorations, and medalsDistinctions(Lists)By confereeFounts of honour*
States
and their national/public/official authorities
Dynasties
heads of currently or formerly sovereign royal families
Private
Ecclesiastical
Organisations
Commercial
(Self-styled order)
By typeOrders
Order of chivalry
Military order
Colonial order
Order of merit
Royal family order
Titles(Styles,Post-nominalBy function
Grand master
Chancellor
Treasurer
Assessor
Bailiff
Prior
Chaplain
Master of ceremonies

Grand Cross/Grand Cordon
Commander
Officer
Hospitaller
Knight/Dame
Postulant
Squire
PageJurisdictions
Charter
Bailiwick
Chapter
Commandery
Obedience
Grand Lodge
Lodge

Others,by fieldMilitary(List)
List of highest
Campaign medal
Law enforcement
Civilian(List)Society
Peace
Intellectual freedom
Human rights
Law
Humanitarianism
Politics
Volunteer
Culture
Architecture
Art
Film
History
Literature
Music
Philosophy
Poetry
Theatre

Science
Religion-related
Ecclesiastical
Sports
Scouting
Beauty
By insignia(Named after people)For wearing(decorations)Formal
Collar
Grand Cross/Grand Cordon
with sash
Medal
Necklet
Medal bar
Medal ribbon
Other
Rosette
Award pin
Lapel pin
Collar pin
Tie pin
Badge
Heraldic
Pilgrim
Ring
Button
Campaign
Service
Prizes
Trophy
Plaquette
Rosette
Money
Prizes known as the Nobel of a field
Ceremonies and events
Accolade
Vigil
Feoffment
Passage fee
Festival
Vow
Collar day
Related organisations
Fraternity
Confraternity
Fraternal order
Fraternities and sororities
Secret society
Guild
Learned society
Fellowship
Honor society
Hereditary society
Club
Gentlemen's club
International Commission for Orders of Chivalry
Related concepts
Numismatics
Heraldry
Vexillology
Service flag
Battle honour
Campaign streamer
Nobility
Order of precedence
Honorary degree
Devotional medal
Awareness ribbon
Code of conduct

* = Direct or indirect reference to fount of honour is the accepted criterion for official distinctions
 Category:Orders, decorations, and medals
 Wikipedia:WikiProject Orders, decorations, and medals
Wikipedia:WikiProject Awards

vtePersonal names and anthroponymy
Personal identity
Personal name
Birth name
Given name
Surname
Patrilineal/Matrilineal
Affixes
Nobiliary particle
By sequence
First name
Middle name
Last name
By trait
Diminutive
Double-barrelled
Epithet
Animal
Common
Plant
Eponymic
Matronymic
Metonymic
Mononymic
Occupational
Patronymic
Surname
Sobriquet
Teknonymic
Toponymic
Surname
Patrial
Unisex
Virtue
By life situation
Aptronym
Birth name
Code name
Maiden and married names
Necronym
Posthumous name
Temple name
Placeholder name
Notname
Regnal name
Slave name
Pseudonyms (list)
Art name
Bugō
Nicknames
list
Hypocorism
Monarchs
Nom de guerre
Pen name
Heteronym
Ring name
Shikona
Stage name
List
Mononyms
Username
By cultureSurnames by countryEast Asian
Amami
Chinese
Courtesy
Art
Generation
Japanese
Korean
Manchu
Okinawan
Taiwanese aboriginal
Vietnamese
Northern Asiaand Central Asia
Kalmyk
Mongolian
Sakha
Tibetan
Muslim worldand Western Asia
Afghan
Arabic
Azerbaijani
Bengali
Berber
Coptic
Mandaean
Pakistani
Pashtun
Persian
Sindhi
Somali
Tatar
Turkish
Oceania
Australian Aboriginal
Fijian
Hawaiian
Māori
Sub-Saharan Africa
Ashanti
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Eritrean and Ethiopian
Ewe
Ghanaian
Igbo
Yoruba
Zimbabwean
Europe, North Americaand Australasia
Albanian
Armenian
Ashkenazi Jewish
Basque
Estonian
Finnish
Georgian
Greek
Ancient Greek
Cypriot
Hungarian
Baltic
Latvian
Lithuanian
Celtic
Cornish
Irish
Manx
Scottish
Welsh
Germanic
Dutch
English
American
African-American
Canadian
Hongkongese
German
Gothic
Icelandic
Scandinavian
Swedish
Romance
Catalan
French
Italian
Occitan
Portuguese
Roman
Praenomen
Nomen
Cognomen
Agnomen
Romanian
Spanish
Hispanic America
Slavic
Bulgarian
Croatian
Czech
Eastern Slavic
Belarusian
Russian
Ukrainian
Kashubian
Macedonian
Polish
Serbian
Slovak
Suffixes

Indosphere (South Asiaand Southeast Asia)
Balinese
Bengali
Burmese
Filipino
Indonesian
Chinese
Javanese
Cambodian
Malaysian
Indian
Lao
Pakistani
Sindhi
Sinhalese
Ancient Tamil country
Thai
By religion
Christian name
Biblical name
Papal name
Saint's name
Buddhist surname
Dharma name
Jewish name
Hebrew
Mandaean name
Theophoric name
Manners of addressListof authority/of honourStyles
Honorific
Diplomatic
Imperial, royal, and noble
Judiciary
Religious
Ecclesiastical
Pre-nominal letters
Suffix
Emeritus
Post-nominal letters
Academic
Orders, decorations, and medals
Titles
Academic
Imperial, royal and noble
Chivalric
Courtesy
False
Hereditary
Subsidiary
Substantive
Military
Professional
Academic
Educational
Honorary
Business
Diplomatic
Judicial
Religious
Ecclesiastical
Papal
Related traditions
Baptism
Name day
Calendar of saints
Related
Acronym
Anonymity
Anthropomorphism
Personification
National
Call sign
Deadnaming
Endonym and exonym
Family
Galton–Watson process
Legal name
Name change
List
Given
Surname
Namesake
Naming taboo
Nomenclature
Nomen nescio
Misnomer
Onomastics
-onym
Personal identity
Identifier
Proper name
Signature
Monogram
Royal cypher
Khelrtva
Signum manus
Tughra
Surnames by country

Category:Lists of names





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fellow&oldid=1176596576"
Categories: Academic administrationEducation and training occupationsCorporate titlesPositions of authorityLeadershipHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles needing additional references from June 2019All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2016Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021Articles with unsourced statements from March 2014Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022Broad-concept articles






 This page was last edited on 22 September 2023, at 19:20 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view













Toggle limited content width







