



Late binding - Wikipedia



























Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file





Languages

Language links are at the top of the page.



















Search











Search





























Create account

Log in








Personal tools





 Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1History







2Late binding implementations



Toggle Late binding implementations subsection





2.1Late binding in dynamically-typed object-oriented languages







2.2Late binding in Lisp







2.3Late binding in C++







2.4Late binding in COM languages







2.5Late binding in .NET







2.6Late binding in Java







2.7Early vs. late binding in PL/SQL and Ada









3Criticism







4See also







5References

















Toggle the table of contents







Late binding



3 languages




CatalàMagyar日本語

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR codeWikidata item





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version

























From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


When called functions or methods are looked up by name at runtime
This article is about associating a name with an operation. For the selection of an implementation of a polymorphic operation, see Dynamic dispatch.
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Late binding" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
In computing, late binding or dynamic linkage[1]—though not an identical process to dynamically linking imported code libraries—is a computer programming mechanism in which the method being called upon an object, or the function being called with arguments, is looked up by name at runtime. In other words, a name is associated with a particular operation or object at runtime, rather than during compilation. The name dynamic binding is sometimes used,[2] but is more commonly used to refer to dynamic scope.
With early binding, or static binding, in an object-oriented language, the compilation phase fixes all types of variables and expressions. This is usually stored in the compiled program as an offset in a virtual method table ("v-table").[3] In contrast, with late binding, the compiler does not read enough information to verify the method exists or bind its slot on the v-table. Instead, the method is looked up by name at runtime.
The primary advantage of using late binding in Component Object Model (COM) programming is that it does not require the compiler to reference the libraries that contain the object at compile time. This makes the compilation process more resistant to version conflicts, in which the class's v-table may be accidentally modified. (This is not a concern in just-in-time compiled platforms such as .NET or Java, because the v-table is created at runtime by the virtual machine against the libraries as they are being loaded into the running application.[4])


History[edit]
The term "late binding" dates back to at least the 1960s, where it can be found in Communications of the ACM. The term was widely used to describe calling conventions in languages like Lisp, though usually with negative connotations about performance.[5]
In the 1980s Smalltalk popularized object-oriented programming (OOP) and with it late binding. Alan Kay once said, "OOP to me means only messaging, local retention, and protection and hiding of state-process, and extreme late-binding of all things. It can be done in Smalltalk and in LISP. There are possibly other systems in which this is possible, but I'm not aware of them."[6]
In the early to mid-1990s, Microsoft heavily promoted its COM standard as a binary interface between different OOP programming languages. COM programming equally promoted early and late binding, with many languages supporting both at the syntax level.
In 2000, Alex Martelli coined the term "duck typing" to refer to a similar concept, but with a different emphasis. While late binding generally focuses on implementation details, duck typing focuses on the ability to ignore types and concentrate on the methods an object currently has.

Late binding implementations[edit]
Late binding in dynamically-typed object-oriented languages[edit]
In most dynamically-typed languages, the list of methods on an object can be altered at runtime. This requires late binding.

Late binding in Lisp[edit]
In Lisp, late bound global function calls are efficiently looked up at runtime via a symbol's function cell. These function bindings are mutable.
Example using an interactive Clozure Common Lisp session:

? (defun foo ()
    (bar pi))   ; a still undefined function BAR gets called
;Compiler warnings :
;   In FOO: Undefined function BAR
FOO

? (defun bar (x)   ; now we define it
    (* x 2))
BAR

? (foo)    ; calling foo and it uses the recent definition of BAR
6.283185307179586D0

? (defun bar (x)   ; now we redefine BAR
    (* x 1000))
BAR

? (foo)    ;  FOO now calls the new function, there is no need to recompile/link/load FOO
3141.592653589793D0

? (type-of 'bar)   ;  BAR is a symbol
SYMBOL

? (symbol-function 'bar)  ; the symbol BAR has a function binding
#<Compiled-function BAR #x302000D1B21F>

Late binding in C++[edit]
In C++, late binding (also called "dynamic binding") refers to what normally happens when the virtual keyword is used in a method's declaration. C++ then creates a so-called virtual table, which is a look-up table for such functions that will always be consulted when they are called.[7]  Usually, the "late binding" term is used in favor of "dynamic dispatch".

Late binding in COM languages[edit]
In COM programming a late-bound method call is performed using the IDispatch interface. Some COM-based languages such as Visual Basic 6 have syntactical support for calling this interface.[8] This is done by defining the variable's type as Object. Others such as C++ require that you explicitly call GetIDsOfNames to look up a method and Invoke to call it.

Late binding in .NET[edit]
In .NET, late binding refers to overriding a virtual method like C++ or implementing an interface. The compiler builds virtual tables for every virtual or interface method call which is used at run-time to determine the implementation to execute.
Also like COM and Java, the Common Language Runtime provides reflection APIs that can make late binding calls. The use of these calls varies by language.
With C# 4, the language also added the "dynamic" pseudo-type. This would be used in place of the Object type to indicate that late binding is desired. The specific late binding mechanism needed is determined at runtime using the Dynamic Language Runtime as a starting point.
Visual Basic uses them whenever the variable is of type Object and the compiler directive "Option Strict Off" is in force. This is the default setting for a new VB project. Prior to version 9, only .NET and COM objects could be late bound. With VB 10, this has been extended to DLR-based objects.

Late binding in Java[edit]
There are three definitions for late binding in Java.
Early documents on Java discussed how classes were not linked together at compile time. While types are statically checked at compile time, different implementations for classes could be swapped out just prior to runtime simply by overwriting the class file. As long as the new class definition had the same class and method names, the code would still work. In this sense it is similar to the traditional definition of late binding.
Currently, it is popular to use the term late binding in Java programming as a synonym for dynamic dispatch. Specifically, this refers to Java's single dispatch mechanism used with virtual methods.
Finally, Java can use late binding using its reflection APIs and type introspection much in the same way it is done in COM and .NET programming. Generally speaking those who only program in Java do not call this late binding. Likewise the use of "duck typing" techniques is frowned upon in Java programming, with abstract interfaces used instead.
Oracle, the current owner of Java, has been known to use the term late binding in the "duck typing" sense when discussing both Java and other languages in the same documentation.[9]

Early vs. late binding in PL/SQL and Ada[edit]
When using early binding between Ada and a database-stored procedure, a timestamp is checked to verify that the stored procedure has not changed since the code was compiled. This allows for faster executions and prevents the application from running against the wrong version of a stored procedure.[10]
When using late binding the timestamp check is not performed, and the stored procedure is executed via an anonymous PL/SQL block. While this can be slower, it removes the need to recompile all of the client applications when a stored procedure changes.
This distinction appears to be unique to PL/SQL and Ada. Other languages that can call PL/SQL procedures, as well as other database engines, only use late binding.

Criticism[edit]
This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (July 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Late binding has poorer performance than an early bound method call. Under most implementations, the correct method address must be looked up by name with each call, requiring relatively expensive dictionary search and possibly overload resolution logic. In most applications, the extra compute and time required is negligible on modern computers.
For some compilers, late binding may prevent the use of static type checking. When making a late bound call, the compiler has to assume that the method exists. This means a simple spelling error can cause a run-time error to be thrown. Modern compilers avoid this by ensuring that every possible call must have an implementation during compilation.
Late binding may prevent forms of static analysis needed by an integrated development environment (IDE). For example, an IDE's "go to definition" feature may not function on a late-bound call, if the IDE has no way to know which class the call may refer to. A modern IDE easily solves this especially for object-oriented languages since a late-bound method always specifies an interface or base class, which is where "go to definition" leads, and "find all references" can be used to find all implementations or overrides.[11]

See also[edit]

Computer programming portal
Late linking
Dynamic linker
Dynamic dispatch
Name binding
References[edit]


^ Schreiner, Axel-Tobias (1994). Object-Oriented Programming With ANSI-C (PDF). Munich: Hanser. p. 15. ISBN 3-446-17426-5.

^ Booch, Grady. Object-oriented Analysis and Design. Addison-Wesley, 1994. p71

^ "Using early binding and late binding in Automation". Microsoft. 2003-09-06. Archived from the original on 2014-06-27. Retrieved 2014-06-27.

^ "The Structure of the Java Virtual Machine: Dynamic Linking". Sun Microsystems. 1999. sec. 3.6.3. Retrieved 2013-09-21.

^ Software engineering techniques, J. N. Buxton, Brian Randell, NATO Science Committee, NATO Science Committee, 1970

^ "Dr. Alan Kay on the Meaning of "Object-Oriented Programming"". Purl.org. Retrieved 2013-08-16.

^ "12.5 — The virtual table « Learn C". Learncpp.com. 2008-02-08. Retrieved 2013-08-16.

^ "Using early binding and late binding in Automation". Support.microsoft.com. Retrieved 2011-01-15.

^ "Calling into WebLogic Server from a COM Client Application". Download.oracle.com. Retrieved 2013-08-16.

^ "Early and Late Binding, Oracle SQL *Module for Ada Programmer's Guide". Download.oracle.com. Retrieved 2011-01-15.

^ KathleenDollard. "Early and Late Binding - Visual Basic". learn.microsoft.com. Retrieved 2023-04-12.






Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Late_binding&oldid=1190566489"
Categories: Method (computer programming)Programming language conceptsHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles needing additional references from January 2011All articles needing additional referencesArticles that may contain original research from July 2019All articles that may contain original research






 This page was last edited on 18 December 2023, at 16:39 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view













Toggle limited content width







